HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President-elect
Donald Trump begins assembling a
team for
his White House transition, what
these moves
say about the future
administration.
Also ahead this Tuesday: a look
at what's
behind the surge in hate crimes
since the
election, and how race relations
could change
under a Trump presidency.
A look at the lives transformed
by the Paris
attacks, one man's journey to
find peace,
one year later.
MARK COLCLOUGH, Psychotherapist:
I saw absolutely
extraordinary events, have
changed my view
on myself, have changed my view
on humanity
entirely.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we gather
some of the
tremendous outpouring
remembering Gwen Ifill.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
President-elect Trump has
spent another day huddling with
advisers on
key Cabinet jobs.
Vice president-elect Mike Pence
led the arrivals
today at Trump Tower in New
York.
Another adviser dismissed
concerns that Mr.
Trump is staying out of sight.
MAN: I think he's -- you know,
he's making
phone calls to leaders and
they're calling
him.
He's having people come in.
And you're probably in the best
place to be
here and watch who's coming and
going.
And he's just talking as it's
appropriate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
president-elect was
heard from today on losing the
popular vote
to Hillary Clinton.
He tweeted: "If the election
were based on
total popular vote, I would have
campaigned
in New York, Florida and
California and won
even bigger and more easily."
President Obama urged world
leaders today
to heed the lessons of Donald
Trump's election.
The president spoke in Athens
after talks
with Greek Prime Minister Alexis
Tsipras.
He said voters are scared their
children will
be less well-off, and he issued
a warning.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We are going to have to guard
against a rise
in a crude sort of nationalism,
or ethnic
identity, or tribalism that is
built around
an us and a them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
also defended
his own economic record, saying
the country's
indisputably better off.
France and the U.N. today
stepped up appeals
to president-elect Trump not to
quit a global
accord on climate change.
French President Francois
Hollande said dropping
out of the Paris agreement would
be disastrous
for future generations.
U.N. Secretary Ban Ki-Moon
agreed, but said
he's sure the incoming president
will make
a good and wise decision.
House Speaker Paul Ryan has won
the unanimous
support of his fellow
Republicans to stay
on the job.
Their vote today clears the way
for the full
House to make it official come
January.
Before today's vote, Ryan said
he's ready
and eager, with Republicans
controlling both
Congress and the White House
starting next
year.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: Welcome
to the dawn of a new unified
Republican government.
It feels really good to say
that, actually.
This will be a government
focused on turning
president-elect Trump's victory
into real
progress for the American
people.
Our team is very excited and we
cannot wait
to get to work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
Democrats delayed
their leadership contest for
another two weeks,
amid dissatisfaction over the
election results.
It's unclear if Minority Leader
Nancy Pelosi
will face a serious challenge,
but more than
two dozen Democrats asked to
delay the vote.
In Syria, a three-week break in
airstrikes
on Aleppo is over.
Syrian planes blasted rebels in
the city today,
and Russia launched a new air
offensive elsewhere.
Russian jets from an aircraft
carrier and
long-range missiles hit targets
in two provinces.
Moscow says they targeted
Islamic State militants
and others.
The State Department is playing
down findings
that American troops and the CIA
may be guilty
of war crimes in Afghanistan.
The report comes from the
International Criminal
Court.
In it, the chief prosecutor says
the detainees
were subject to torture, cruel
treatment,
and outrages upon personal
dignity between
2003 and 2014.
The U.S. is not part of the
court, but any
American who's indicted could
still face prosecution.
Police in Germany carried out
raids today
on nearly 200 apartments,
offices and mosques
tied to a newly banned Islamist
group.
It allegedly recruited youths to
fight in
Iraq and Syria.
Officers collected troves of
documents, hard
drives and weapons as evidence.
The raids took place in more
than 60 cities.
There's word that Chinese
software in some
Android phones automatically
sends data back
to a server in China.
The New York Times reports the
software monitors
locations, call logs and text
messages.
International customers and
users of disposable
or prepaid phones are most
affected.
The data collection could be for
advertising
usage or intelligence.
And on Wall Street, energy
stocks led the
market higher as oil prices
surged 6 percent,
amid talk that OPEC will cut
output.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 54
points to close at 18923.
The Nasdaq rose 57 points, and
the S&P 500
added 16.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what the
president-elect's staff picks
tell us about
his policies; recent tensions in
race relations
and what they may portend for
the future;
a psychotherapist's struggle
with his own
trauma one year after the Paris
attacks; and
much more.
Now we turn to president-elect
Trump's transition
to the White House and how his
team is tackling
the handover of executive reins.
For that, we are joined by Alex
Isenstadt
of Politico.
So, Alex, you're reporting on
this every today.
Where do things stand right now?
ALEX ISENSTADT, Politico: Well,
look, it's
a transition that's very much in
flux.
And you're starting to see a
pattern here
of a Donald Trump sort of
overseeing a process
that very much was sort of like
his campaign.
There was a little bit of chaos
involved.
You're sort of starting to see
some of that
chaos seep into the transition a
little bit.
And perhaps this is a little --
perhaps this
provides an indication of what
Donald Trump's
management and leadership style
is going to
be like once he gets to the
White House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Chris
Christie was demoted
last week.
Mike Pence replaced him.
And he's overarching the kind of
lead on this.
But there's been some internal
strife.
We hear Mike Rogers stepped
down.
What was behind that?
ALEX ISENSTADT: Well, look, Mike
Rogers, former
congressman from Michigan, used
to head the
Intel Committee in Congress, he
was very close
to Chris Christie, who last week
was pushed
aside in a leadership shuffle,
where they
put vice president-elect Mike
Pence in charge.
And so this is something that
you also saw
during the campaign where Donald
Trump went
through several different
campaign managers.
He's now going through a few
different transition
heads.
Again, you're starting to see
sort of a pattern
emerge here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the grand
scheme of things,
does it matter?
I probably couldn't tell you who
managed the
transition for the last three,
four, ever
presidents?
ALEX ISENSTADT: Well, it's a
great question.
And, to some extent, this is
inside baseball.
It's parlor game stuff.
But to some degree, it does
indicate perhaps
something about Donald Trump's
leadership
style, how he oversees things,
and exactly
how he's going to make some
decisions.
This comes at a time when a lot
of Americans
are looking for more information
on how Donald
Trump is going to lead and how
he makes key
decisions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there also
seems to
be this tension.
What he wanted on the campaign
was -- he ran
as an outsider.
He wanted people from outside
Washington.
Yet, right now, when you
actually have lots
and lots of jobs to fill, he's
calling on
some insiders.
ALEX ISENSTADT: Absolutely.
Look at the names that you're
hearing talked
of for top jobs, people like
Rudy Giuliani,
people like Jeff Sessions, the
Alabama senator.
These people are -- to some
degree, they're
insiders, but they also share a
similar trait,
which is that they were all
loyal to him during
the campaign, at a time, during
a campaign,
when a lot of Republicans sought
to distance
themselves from Donald Trump.
He's priding loyalty and he's
looking to those
who were loyal to him during the
campaign,
who stood behind him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He's also now
getting the
intelligence briefings on a
daily basis that
President Obama gets.
How is that influencing some of
the decisions
that he has in front of him now?
ALEX ISENSTADT: It's unclear.
And it's also unclear exactly
how this is
shaping who is going to be
getting some of
these top posts.
There was some reporting over
the last day
or so that Trump wanted
clearance for his
children and for his son-in-law,
Jared Kushner,
to also be getting these
security clearances.
The campaign -- or the
transition committee,
rather, pushed back a little bit
on that reporting.
But, look, it's clear that this
is a guy who
is new to government.
He's new to this kind of thing,
and he's now
for the first time getting this
information.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are transition
teams the
place where you start to reward
your friends
who have been loyal to you for
so long and
eventually maybe in government
positions as
well?
ALEX ISENSTADT: Well, look, you
look back
at George W. Bush's
administration, he selected
people who were very close to
his family,
to his father, and so you do see
some of that
But it's interesting.
You look at the people who
Donald Trump is
looking at, even people who he
has already
selected, Reince Priebus,
Stephen Bannon.
Those are people who really
played key roles
in his campaign and now are
going to be overseeing
his White House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Alex Isenstadt
of Politico, thanks so much.
ALEX ISENSTADT: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just this past
weekend,
president-elect Trump announced
his picks
for two key posts in the White
House.
RNC Chairman Reince Priebus will
serve as
White House chief of staff.
And Stephen Bannon, executive
chairman of
Breitbart News, will serve as
Mr. Trump's
chief strategist and senior
counselor.
Our John Yang has more.
JOHN YANG: For more on these two
men tapped
to advise the president, we're
joined by Mark
Leibovich, chief national
correspondent for
"The New York Times" magazine,
and Joshua
Green, senior national
correspondent for Bloomberg
Businessweek.
Josh, Mark, thanks for joining
us.
Josh, let me start with you.
You profiled Steve Bannon more
than a year
ago, before a lot of people
realized who he
was.
That's the employment that's
gaining a lot
of controversy.
Just this afternoon, Senator
Harry Reid, the
Democratic leader in the Senate,
took to the
Senate floor and criticized
Bannon in pretty
harsh terms.
SEN.
HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: If Trump
is serious about seeking unity,
the first
thing he should do is rescind
his appointment
of Steve Bannon.
Rescind it.
Don't do it.
Think about this.
As long as a champion of racial
division is
a step away from the Oval
Office, it will
be impossible to take Trump's
efforts to heal
the nation seriously.
JOHN YANG: Josh, who is Steve
Bannon, and
why is he attracting all this
criticism?
JOSHUA GREEN, Bloomberg
Businessweek: Well,
Bannon is an odd and interesting
character.
He's a former Goldman Sachs
banker who sort
of became radicalized into the
Tea Party movement
and eventually wound up as the
publisher of
Breitbart News, which is the
hard-right populist
Web site that was an early
champion of Trump's.
I think the reason he's so
controversial is
that Breitbart publishes a lot
of things that
are vaguely racist,
anti-Semitic, far, far
outside the bounds of what would
ordinarily
be considered acceptable in U.S.
politics.
And so I think there's quite a
bit of shock
at the fact that he's been
elevated to a senior
position in the Trump White
House.
JOHN YANG: You talk about
Breitbart News.
We have got some headlines that
we can show
to give people an idea of what
Breitbart News
is.
"Bill Kristol, Republican
Spoiler, Renegade
Jew."
"Gabby Giffords, The Gun Control
Movement's
Human Shield."
"The Solution to Online
Harassment Is Simple:
Women Should Log Off."
How much of Breitbart is Steve
Bannon, and
how much of Steve Bannon is
Breitbart?
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, Bannon
doesn't write often,
and I don't think he writes the
headlines,
but he's sort of the pirate
captain and the
guy ultimately responsible for
what's published
there.
And if you know Bannon and if
you read Breitbart
News, essentially, what they do
is they set
out to shock and scandalize and
upset people
by targeting both political
establishments.
In Internet language, they're
essentially
a trolling operation.
And ordinarily these people
exist on the fringes
of journalism and on the fringes
of politics.
And what's so unusual here is
that Bannon
has now been brought into the
West Wing of
the White House.
JOHN YANG: But, Josh, I guess
what I'm asking
is, you spent a lot of time with
Bannon last
year.
How much of what you see on
Breitbart News
is reflective of who Bannon is?
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, he is
certainly a controversialist.
He's someone who enjoys being an
outsider
and throwing rocks.
I can only speak to what I saw
personally.
And Bannon, as I mentioned, he's
a former
Goldman Sachs banker.
He reminded me a lot of other
Wall Street
bankers I have encountered, sort
of testosterone-addled
and vaguely sexist, but
certainly not racist
or anti-Semitic or some of the
more serious
charges we have seen throw him
and at Breitbart
News.
JOHN YANG: And, Mark, you spent
a lot of time
with Reince Priebus earlier this
year for
a profile you did in "The Times
Magazine."
Tell us who he is and why his
appointment
is sort of being looked on as a
reassuring
thing among establishment
Republicans.
MARK LEIBOVICH, "The New York
Times Magazine":
Well, Reince Priebus is the
ultimate party
guy.
He's basically worked for the
Republican Party
his entire life.
He's a lawyer by trade, but he's
been the
RNC chair for the last five or
six years now.
And he's come up through the
ranks through
Wisconsin.
And he really much -- very much
is actually
the establishment that Donald
Trump ran against,
that Steve Bannon has built a
lot of his career
sort of trying to target and
trying to embarrass
and trying to take down.
So, it's a really kind of
interesting, if
not somewhat bizarre coupling
there.
Now, Reince Priebus, it's been
said, had maybe
the most thankless job in
American politics
over the last six to eight
months, trying
to make -- turn the party of
Lincoln or shepherd
the party of Lincoln into the
party of Trump
essentially without alienating
everyone.
And then, I think to his
surprise and everyone's
surprise, he wound up on the
winning end last
week.
And now he developed a good
relationship with
Donald Trump.
And, lo and behold, Donald Trump
has named
him his chief of staff.
So, in a way, Priebus goes from
being -- having
the most thankless job in
American politics
to having the most thankless job
in American
government.
So, we will see how he handles
the transition.
He's obviously uniquely
qualified for thanklessness.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: Well, Mark, if he was
what Donald
Trump was running against, why
do you think
Donald Trump picked him, and
what do you think
Priebus' goals are in the Trump
White House?
MARK LEIBOVICH: If there is one
unifying thing
we have seen in every
appointment or even
rumored appointment that Donald
Trump has
made or is yet to make, it's
that he is loyal.
And he likes having his people
around.
And Paul Ryan -- Reince Priebus
and Paul Ryan
are very, very close.
Priebus spent a lot of time
trying to broker
some kind of working
relationship between
the Republican speaker of the
House and the
Republican nominee, who had very
much cross
purposes.
Now, Steve Bannon, very
different in outlook
and temperament and personality
than Reince
Priebus, but they both became
sort of first
among equals, or have become
first among equals,
in that they both were very
loyal to Trump.
And that seems to be the first
thing that
Donald Trump looks for in
ordering his world,
who has been nice to him, who
has been loyal
to him, who he feels he can
count on.
And that's what we're seeing.
And I think they both have those
qualifications.
JOHN YANG: And, Josh, you know
both Reince
Priebus and Steve Bannon.
Based on what you know, why do
you think Donald
Trump has picked this team, has
picked these
-- and he says they're going to
be co-equals?
Why do you think he's put them
together, and
what do you think Steve Bannon's
goals in
the Trump White House will be?
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, I think the
reason Trump
picked these two is that they
have essentially
been two of the leading powers
in his presidential
campaign since Bannon came
aboard last August.
In a sense, all Trump has done
is ratify the
existing power structure and
move it from
the campaign into the White
House.
I think what Bannon would like,
by all accounts,
is to take over the Republican
Party and steer
it in a more populist,
hard-right direction,
more along the lines of the
populist movements
we have seen sweep across
Europe, across Great
Britain.
I think he believes that Trump
is the American
manifestation of those ideas,
and he's going
to do everything he can to keep
Trump as someone
positioned outside the party
establishment
in Washington and able to kind
of speak for
that grassroots, populist anger
that really
carried Trump to victory on
November 8.
JOHN YANG: Josh Green, Mark
Leibovich, we
will see what this team does in
some 60 days.
Thanks for joining us.
MARK LEIBOVICH: Thanks, John.
JOSHUA GREEN: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, as we
continue to mourn
the loss of Gwen Ifill, we turn
to a subject
dear to her: how the country can
overcome
our racial divisions.
Since last week's elections,
there have been
increasing reports of hate
crimes in communities
across the nation.
Yesterday, the FBI reported a
rise in hate
crimes in the U.S. last year.
They were up by 6.8 percent
overall, more
than 5,800 hate crimes,
including a dramatic
surge against Muslims in this
country, 257
reports last year alone.
That's up 67 percent.
Since the election, the Southern
Poverty Law
Center reported there have been
more than
400 incidents of harassment or
intimidation.
President-elect Trump was asked
by Lesley
Stahl about the rise in reports
on "60 Minutes."
That aired Sunday.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I'm very
surprised to hear that.
I hate to hear that.
I mean, I hate to hear that.
LESLEY STAHL, CBS News: But you
do hear it.
DONALD TRUMP: I don't hear it.
LESLEY STAHL: You're not seeing
this?
DONALD TRUMP: I saw -- I saw one
or two instances.
LESLEY STAHL: On social media?
DONALD TRUMP: But I think it's a
very small
amount.
Again, I think it's...
LESLEY STAHL: Do you want to say
anything
to those people?
DONALD TRUMP: I would say, don't
do it, that's
terrible, because I'm going to
bring this
country together.
LESLEY STAHL: They're harassing
Latinos, Muslims.
DONALD TRUMP: I am so saddened
to hear that.
And I say, stop it.
If it -- if it helps, I will say
this, and
I will say right to the camera:
Stop it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We explore
this with Mark
Potok, an expert in extremism at
the Southern
Poverty Law Center, Eddie
Glaude, chair of
the Department for
African-American Studies
at Princeton University.
And Rizwan Jaka, he's chairman
of the board
at the All Dulles Area Muslim
Society Center.
Mark, you have been tracking
these incidents.
How have they increased, and
what kind of
incidents are we seeing?
MARK POTOK, Southern Poverty Law
Center: Well,
we have seen a real rash mainly
of attacks
of on people who are thought to
be Muslims,
but also attacks, or something
less than actual
hate crimes, kind of yelling and
hate incidents,
directed at black people, at
Latinos, at gay
people.
It very much seems like kind of
the lid has
been ripped off Pandora's box
and virtually
every minority out there is a
target.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rizwan Jaka...
MARK POTOK: We started counting
these incidents...
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sorry.
Go ahead.
MARK POTOK: ... starting
yesterday, and we
have already counted over 430 of
them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rizwan Jaka,
it seems to
have affected the Muslim
community very acutely,
but this isn't the first time.
RIZWAN JAKA, Chairman, All
Dulles Area Muslim
Society: No, correct.
No, thank you.
Definitely, it's been a roller
coaster of
challenges in the past 15 years,
since the
horrific attack of 9/11.
And there has been an increase
in the past
few years.
In 2015, over 75 mosques were
attacked.
Many people were harassed.
Then, this year alone, 53-plus
mosques were
attacked.
And definitely in recent times,
we're seeing
challenges where Muslim women
that are wearing
the scarf are being taunted or
harassed or
threatened because of what
they're doing.
And so it's a challenge we have
been seeing.
Usually, it increases around
presidential
cycles.
So, in 2011 and '12, we saw an
increase in
stereotyping and bigotry.
And it's obviously increased in
this past
two years as well.
And so we're all concerned, and
obviously
there's bigotry across the
spectrum, across
all demographics, and we're
concerned about
it all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Eddie Glaude,
what has this
campaign uncovered that perhaps
was lying
just beneath the surface?
EDDIE GLAUDE, Professor of
Religion and African-American
Studies, Princeton University:
Well, in some
ways, the campaign has let the
genie out of
the bottle.
It's Trump's rhetoric.
The nature of the campaign, even
the slogan
"Make America great again" has
given license
to hate.
And in some ways, his election
has given license
for folks to act on that hate.
And so I think what we have seen
-- and let
me be very clear here.
We don't want to paint all Trump
supporters
with this broad brush that all
Trump supporters
are out here engaging in these
kind of violent
actions.
But what we do know is that
there is a certain
segment of the American
population that has
found in Trump, right, an
exemplar, found
in Trump justification to go out
and attack
minority populations, and then
to put forward
an idea of America that is
white, an idea
of America that is heterosexist
-- or heterosexual,
an idea of America that is
decidedly -- let
me just be very clear --
decidedly white in
its makeup.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, while
the Trump campaign
gets a fair amount of credit or
blame for
this, how much do global events,
especially
when it looks like -- when it
pertains to
the attacks on Muslim, how much
do global
events play into this, in at
least the numbers
we saw in 2015?
MARK POTOK: I think they without
question
play into it.
I mean, 2015 was a year of some
real atrocities,
incredible attacks from the
Islamic State,
both in Europe, of course, and
in the United
States.
So, you know, people react to
those slaughters.
And also there are a whole raft
out there
of anti-Muslim ideologues who
essentially
exploit these attacks in order
to paint not
merely Islamist radicals, but
all Muslims
as extremists.
At the same time, of course, for
half of last
year, contributing to this very
large jump
in hate crimes, according to the
FBI, the
Trump campaign was in full
force, and very
active, frankly, in defaming
Muslims in general
and Islam in particular.
So, I think both things
contributed.
It's hard to sort out exactly
which is responsible
for, you know, the most
violence, the most
hatred.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rizwan Jaka,
there seems
to be a conflation between
events that happen
overseas and Muslim Americans
facing it.
What have your community members
been telling
you?
How have you been personally
affected?
RIZWAN JAKA: Yes.
No, definitely, there's a lot of
stereotyping
that occurs.
Obviously, as American Muslims,
we condemn
terrorism, we condemn violent
extremism.
And it's unfair that the
stereotyping and
negative portrayal of the vast
majority of
the 99.99 percent of American
Muslims that
are peaceful, law-abiding, and
it's conflated
in that way.
And, yes, like, my own wife and
daughter,
you know, my wife is a
fourth-generation American,
my daughter is a
fifth-generation American.
They were wearing the scarf.
They were told to go back home
because of
what they're wearing.
And we're patriotic Americans.
American Muslims have been here
since before
this country was founded.
Thirty percent of enslaved
Africans were Muslim.
The American Muslim population
is loyal Americans.
And they are obviously
stereotyped.
And, actually, American Muslims
are partners
in national security.
And we're a part of the
solution.
And we need to make sure that
it's not conflated
and that we need to understand
that actually,
statistically speaking, the
overwhelming majority
of terrorism is done by
non-Muslims.
And if you look at the amount of
murders a
year, 16,000 murders a year, you
know, that's
done by non-Muslims.
And so that's something that
people need to
understand, that, yes,terrorism
is something
we need to deal with, but it's
being -- stigmatizing
the Muslim community because of
the perceptions
and stereotypes portrayed
through presidential
election cycles and through
various portrayals
in the media.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, why is
it so hard
to prosecute these hate crimes,
to get convictions?
MARK POTOK: Well, hate crimes in
general are
difficult to prosecute because
you are not
merely trying to prove that
someone did something,
someone punched someone else in
the face or
something along those lines.
You are trying to show why.
What was the motivation of that
person at
the time of the attack?
And that is often very difficult
to get to.
You know, sometimes, the cases
are crystal
clear.
Someone decides they hate black
people.
They talk about it and they kill
the first
black person that crosses their
path.
But much more often, the motives
are tangled
up.
It becomes unclear whether it's
really a bar
fight over a girlfriend, if
somebody started
to use ethnic slurs during that
fight.
You know, what part does hate
really play
in it?
So, ultimately, it's a jury
question.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Eddie Glaude,
I want to
ask, what's the step forward
here, because,
as you point out, it's not just
by race, it's
not just by religion or general
or sexual
preference.
There seems to be an underlying
connection
between patriotism and
otherness.
EDDIE GLAUDE: Yes.
I think, first, we need to
understand the
problem.
I think many people read the
election of Donald
Trump as a kind of triumph,
when, in fact,
I think it's an indication of a
crisis, that
in some ways the demographic
shifts in the
country have created all sorts
of anxieties,
as well as the kind of
bankruptcy of an economic
philosophy that's left -- that's
really eviscerated
workers, black, white, brown,
throughout the
country.
And so, when you have moments of
crisis, communities
often consolidate themselves by
scapegoating
others.
And usually that scapegoating,
at least in
the context of the United
States, has taken
violent form.
And so not only are people
scapegoating Muslims,
African-Americans LGBTQ
communities, right?
They're trying -- in doing so,
they're trying
to draw the boundaries of a
community that's
in some ways in crisis.
So, how do we respond to it?
Well, we respond to it through
the political
process.
We respond to it by organizing,
by in some
ways making clear our principled
commitment
to democracy.
And that's going to be messy.
It's going to require some hard
arguments,
with the understanding that some
folks are
going to disagree with us.
It's going to require some
protests.
It's going to require civil
disobedience.
It's going to require actions at
the polls.
It's going to require actions in
our community.
So, in other words, what we need
to do is
kind of organize ourselves to
put forward
a vision of America that runs
counter to what
we're seeing now.
And that's going to be hard.
It's going to be difficult, and
it's not going
to be easy.
But we have to do it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rizwan Jaka,
what's your
community doing in terms of both
protecting
your own rights and at the same
time making
sure that you're working with
law enforcement
and you're responsible members
of your own
community?
RIZWAN JAKA: Yes, no, thank you.
And, actually, we work very
closely with law
enforcement, local, regional and
national.
We work with the FBI.
And we try to make sure that the
community
is educated on civil rights and
how to counter
hate crimes and how to prevent
hate crimes
as well.
And so we're focused on that
educational aspect,
you know, for the community.
We work very closely with our
interfaith partners
in the Jewish community,
Christian community,
Hindu community, Sikh community,
and all faith
communities, working together
with our African-American
and Hispanic and Asian partners,
so that we
can, as alliances, you know,
counter the prejudices
that are affecting everyone.
There was a KKK flag on a truck
just down
from our mosque the other day,
and they were
intimidating an African-American
lady.
There have been anti-Semitic
attacks in the
area.
There have been anti-Muslim
attacks in the
area.
And so we have to stand
together.
And we are working together in
interfaith
partnerships to counter these
prejudices and
reach out.
We have the reach out to those
that might
have maybe the perceptions.
We need to reach out to Trump
supporters.
And, you know, we call on our
government officials
to visit mosques, visit temples,
so that we
can work together and unite and
heal, rather
than divide.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Rizwan Jaka,
Mark Potok from the Southern
Poverty Law Center,
Eddie Glaude from Princeton,
thank you all.
RIZWAN JAKA: Thank you.
EDDIE GLAUDE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight, PBS
presents the
first part of a documentary
miniseries from
Harvard University Professor
Henry Louis Gates:
"Black America Since MLK: And
Still I Rise."
This clip from tonight's episode
examines
why the phrase "I'm black and I
am proud"
was a radical idea in 1968.
NARRATOR: Even soul brother
number one, the
immensely popular James Brown,
abandoned his
signature patent leather
processed hairstyle
for a natural kinky-headed afro.
MAN: Hello.
This is Don River (ph).
You're on "Black Dignity."
MAN: Yes, what's happening,
James?
MD-BO / I just wanted to ask you
one question.
I would like to know why you got
your process
cut.
JAMES BROWN, Musician: Well,
this is a black
move.
And regardless of what you were
thinking,
we have all got to think one
way.
And if we look alike, we can
think alike.
MAN: The way I see it, it's what
really in
your mind that counts.
JAMES BROWN: Well, the mind
counts, but, see,
we all don't have a good image.
And image is, like, black.
See, we have never fought
together.
In Africa, a man can do what he
want to do
because he know who he is.
Over here, you don't know.
So, first, we have got to get
our image, an
identity.
NARRATOR: And Brown didn't just
change his
look.
He also recorded a song that
would become
a black power anthem.
WOMAN: When we think about, "Say
it loud,
I'm black and I'm proud," we
have got to remember
WOMAN: When we think about, "Say
it loud,
I'm black and I'm proud," we
have got to remember
what a thinker Brown was about
how to deal
in segregated, racist, apartheid
America.
James Brown understood from the
experience
he had as a child.
Dark-skinned black people are
especially hated
in this culture.
They are seen as the true black
people worth
hating.
JAMES PETERSON, Lehigh
University: James Brown's
impact on the cultural life of
people my age
is profound.
There's a way in which the music
that he makes,
I don't know if unmitigated
blackness is the
right way to frame it, but he's
just black.
You know what I'm saying?
Like, unashamed, direct,
forthright, powerful,
in-your-face black.
HARI SREENIVASAN: "Black America
Since MLK:
And Still I Rise" tonight on
most PBS stations
8:00 Eastern, 7:00 Central.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
couple's love
that broke through all
boundaries; and an
outpouring of tributes to our
colleague Gwen
Ifill.
France has been commemorating
the first anniversary
of the Paris attacks, where ISIS
militants
killed 130 people and wounded
nearly 400.
The attack on Friday the 13th
last year was
the worst on French soil since
the Second
World War.
So, how are the survivors coping
with the
trauma one year on?
Last year, we talked to Mark
Colclough, a
British-Danish psychotherapist
who witnessed
the killings at a cafe.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
been back to see him at home.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We're driving
to Funen, Denmark's
central island, where Mark
Colclough now resides.
It's 100 miles from his previous
home in the
capital, Copenhagen.
In the search for peace of mind,
he's found
it necessary to immerse himself
in the tranquility
of nature.
MARK COLCLOUGH, Psychotherapist:
Paris has
changed us on a profound level.
It's so profound, that we can't
quite touch
it yet.
Within that change for me the
last year, I
have noticed how much I need to
get away from
the city and get away from
congregations of
people and sudden movement, and
this kind
of -- you know, the head tick
buzz of -- Copenhagen's
not a busy city, by any means,
compared to
Paris, but it's a lot busier
than this.
And I have really felt the need
to have some
space, some peace and quiet,
where I can just
be myself and I can predict
what's happening.
I'm an ordinary guy.
And I was walking down the
street in Paris
on an ordinary evening in
November, and I
saw absolutely extraordinary
events, have
changed my view on myself, have
changed my
view on humanity entirely.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How have you
been doing?
MARK COLCLOUGH: It's been a long
journey.
I can hardly believe it's been
almost a year
already.
I looked through the interview
that we did
in November last year, when we
met.
And I can see then that I
assumed, two, three
weeks of this, I will be fine,
back to work
as usual.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Colclough
didn't return
to work as a psychotherapist for
a couple
of months.
And then he frequently required
time off.
Do you think you're going to be
permanently
damaged?
MARK COLCLOUGH: Oh, no, no, I
don't think
that at all.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Is that because
you personally
and professionally have the
tools that enable
you to deal with this?
MARK COLCLOUGH: Yes, I think.
I have been in and out of
therapy since I
was 19.
It's always been in my interest,
has been
psychotherapy and psychology.
So I'm aware that I have tools,
and I have
a quite robust sense of self.
And now it's a year later, and I
have had
a really good year.
The first couple of months were
very difficult,and
then the summer gradually got
better and better.
And then the last couple of
weeks, I have
seen a bit of a downturn again.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Returning to
Paris for the
anniversary has affected his
state of mind.
MARK COLCLOUGH: I have been back
in Paris
twice.
And returning to the scene of
the shootings
has been incredibly full of
anxiety before
going, but actually being there
has been incredibly
healing.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mark Colclough
says that
one of the reasons why he's
suffered a psychological
set setback this year is due to
a decision
by the French authority
responsible for distributing
compensation for victims of
terrorism.
They have turned down his
application because
they say he was outside on the
street as a
witness and wasn't inside the
cafe when the
shooting took place.
Now, he's disputing this
decision, saying
that he has suffered
post-traumatic stress
disorder for the past year, and,
as a result,
he has had to cut back on work
by 60 percent.
MARK COLCLOUGH: I'm not looking
for the money.
Even the money feels weird.
It feels like bloody money
somehow.
But I took it as if, as an
authority, they're
saying that the feelings I do
have, the flashbacks
I do have, the nightmares I
still have, that
I'm somehow either not entitled
or less entitled
to them somehow.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Have you become
more altruistic?
Have you become less selfish,
less materialistic?
MARK COLCLOUGH: I have downsized
my life in
many ways.
And my friends and my close --
my close friends
and family have said to me,
pretty much across
the board, that even though what
I have gone
through in Paris was horrific,
it's changed
me, has made me more human, more
vulnerable,
more available to them.
And I find myself tearing up
easily.
I find myself being more moved
by something
more easily, the human gesture,
how much we
can touch each other by doing
something very
simple for each other.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Last year,
Colclough was
quite certain that he wouldn't
suffer from
survivor's guilt, and would
replace it with
what he called survivor's
obligation.
MARK COLCLOUGH: I think the
obligation to
live, to live fully and to give
something
back to the people that I meet
in my life.
I saw four people's lives
extinguished very,
very quickly right in front of
me.
And that obligation is to give
something back
to the people I meet in the
course of my life,
not just professionally, but
also personally.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But his desire
to control
his thoughts and suppress his
subconscious
have failed.
MARK COLCLOUGH: The hardest
feeling over the
last year has been guilt, guilty
about not
having done more and guilty
about not having
-- I mean, I still have dreams
about me intervening
with the gunman and trying to
attack him,
which is -- it was what I was
planning to
do.
I knew that he would be -- or I
assumed he
would be deaf and blinded
somewhat by using
a high-powered assault rifle
inside a small
cafe.
And I was hoping to attack him
on the way
out.
And then I decided not to when I
saw he had
two exits from the cafe.
So, then I ran.
But having seen all these
things, and then
the French authorities saying,
well, because
you stood on a road, we don't
quite recognize
you as a witness of terrorism,
it's very weird.
MALCOLM BRABANT: If you, as a
professional,
are struggling as you are, how
do you think
other people are, especially
those, for example,
who weren't just witnesses, but
who were survivors
in places like the Bataclan,
where there were
bullets flying around their
head?
MARK COLCLOUGH: Yes, and those
shot, not killed,
but wounded and dealing with the
physical
aftermath of being shot.
The path of healing is a very
individual one.
Many witnesses have formed
informal bonds
and informal friendships that
are strong as
concrete.
And I feel that too with the two
witnesses
I'm in touch with.
Our paths have crossed in a day
that was full
of -- a night that was full of
hatred and
carnage, blood and violence.
And, through that, some very
deep, intimate
friendships have been cast.
And I don't think they will ever
break.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Since the
attacks, fears
of Islamic terrorism have
slammed shut Europe's
once open borders and the
continent has lurched
to the right.
MARK COLCLOUGH: It saddens me
entirely that
we think that stricter borders
and shut borders
and Brexit and other events that
have happened
in Europe will somehow protect
nations like
this.
It doesn't work.
Europe moving to the right, as
it has, will
bring us a brittle sense of
security, a false
sense of security, very false,
but it will
instantly minimize the true
freedom we have
in Europe, and that makes me
incredibly sad
to see.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite being
in such a tranquil
place, Colclough endures
flashbacks.
The professional in him welcomes
them because
he says they dilute the memory,
but those
memories will never vanish.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Denmark.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The film
"Loving" opened
nationwide over the weekend.
It tells the true story of
Richard and Loving,
rural Virginians of different
races who married
in Washington, D.C.
On return to their home in
Virginia, they
were arrested for violating laws
against interracial
marriage.
Their case eventually made it to
the Supreme
Court.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JOEL EDGERTON, Actor: I'm going
to build you
a house right here, our house.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Loving" tells
the real-life
love story of Richard and
Mildred Loving,
a Virginia couple who married in
1958 in Washington,
D.C., because interracial
marriage was illegal
in their home state.
Returning home, they were roused
from their
bed at night and arrested.
RUTH NEGGA, Actress: I'm his
wife.
ACTOR: That's no good here.
JEFFREY BROWN: A local judge
gave them a choice:
Spend a year in jail or leave
the state for
25 years.
They left, but later returned
and appealed
their case all the way to the
Supreme Court,
and a landmark civil rights
ruling, Loving
vs. Virginia, striking down
anti-miscegenation
laws across the country.
ACTOR: Is there anything you
would like me
to say to the Supreme Court
justices of the
United States?
JOEL EDGERTON: Yes.
Tell the judge I love my wife.
JEFF NICHOLS, Director,
"Loving": This was
one of the greatest love stories
in American
history, and I had no clue about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Loving" director
Jeff Nichols:
JEFF NICHOLS: I grew up in
Little Rock.
I went to Little Rock Central
High, which
was the site of the
desegregation crisis in
'57.
JEFFREY BROWN: A lot of its own
history, right?
JEFF NICHOLS: You know, I felt
like I was
-- had a pretty good
foundational knowledge
of civil rights history in this
country.
And to not be aware of Richard
and Mildred,
to not know Loving vs. the State
of Virginia,
I was kind of shocked by that,
to be honest.
And I felt like others need to
know about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yet the film
Nichols made is
not a typical historical drama.
It emphasizes personal stories,
rather than
sweeping movements, two people
who wanted
only to live their lives and
found themselves
thrust into history.
There's a scene in which Mildred
is watching
television about the civil
rights march.
JEFF NICHOLS: Yes, in '63.
RUTH NEGGA: You boys stop that
wrestling.
Come help Ms. Laura with her
groceries.
ACTOR: Coming in around this
plaza surrounding
Lincoln Memorial.
ACTRESS: They say there's
100,000 people there.
ACTOR: Standing by along the
parade route.
ACTRESS: Can you imagine?
RUTH NEGGA: Halfway around the
world.
JEFFREY BROWN: She's in the same
city, but
she's not really part of it, in
a way.
JEFF NICHOLS: No, she doesn't
feel like she's
part of that movement.
And she doesn't even feel like
she's part
of that town.
It was literally in the ether
outside her
front door.
But I think she was separated
more than just
by physical space.
It was -- it was, she didn't see
herself as
part of that movement, for some
reason.
MILDRED LOVING, Wife of Richard
Loving: We
was married on the second day of
June, and
the police came after us on the
14th of July.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nichols also
wrote the screenplay
for "Loving," which he based on
the 2012 HBO
documentary "The Loving Story"
Directed by
Nancy Buirski.
RICHARD LOVING, Husband of
Mildred Loving:
They came one night and just
knocked a couple
times.
I heard them.
And before I could get up, they
just broke
the door and came on in.
JEFF NICHOLS: I just fell in
love with these
two people.
I just felt like I knew who they
were.
JEFFREY BROWN: And who were
they?
What did you see in them?
JEFF NICHOLS: Well, in Richard,
I saw my grandfather.
I saw a man that was a
working-class man that
was unable to articulate his
emotions and
his frustrations, but that was
good at really
one thing, which was working
hard and providing
for his family.
And then, in Mildred, I saw
actually a lot
of my grandmother as well, in
that, when you're
married to a man like that, you
have to become
the emotional voice of that
couple.
You know, my grandmother was the
one to write
the birthday cards, and give us
hugs.
But Mildred not only had to be
the emotional
voice.
She had to be the person that
wrote a letter
to Bobby Kennedy that started a
-- you know,
a court case that went all the
way to the
Supreme Court and changed this
country.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Loving" is a
story grounded
in American history, but in a
twist that may
surprise audiences, Joel
Edgerton, who plays
Richard, is Australian, and Ruth
Negga, playing
Mildred, grew up in Ireland,
daughter to an
Ethiopian man and Irish woman.
RUTH NEGGA: We may lose the
small battles,
but win the big war.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did it resonate
personally
for you?
RUTH NEGGA: Of course.
It can't not.
I mean, black and white and
mixed race, those
are things that are part of me
from since
I was a child.
But I think the energy, the
ideology, the
spirit of this story is
completely universal,
you know?
And that's why it's resonated
with people.
And I don't think you need to be
American
to feel it or act it.
I mean, this is a universal
couple.
This is a couple that the world
should be
proud of, not least America.
This is a couple that -- that
may be unknown
to Americans, but now they --
there's another
couple to add to the canon of
people that
you can be proud of in the civil
rights struggle.
JEFFREY BROWN: What was your way
in to Richard?
What was the thing you felt you
had to kind
of get to portray him?
JOEL EDGERTON: Silence, the
silence of injustice,
I think, you know, but silence
and stoicism,
but emasculation and impotency
of not being
able to provide and protect,
I can take care of you.
RUTH NEGGA: I know that.
JOEL EDGERTON: I can take care
of you.
RUTH NEGGA: I know.
JOEL EDGERTON: There's an engine
in a man
that says, I have to be the
protector and
the provider.
And I could see in Richard that
he had all
those abilities and facilities
kind of stripped
of him.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nichols, who also
wrote and
directed the sci-fi thriller
"Midnight Special"
out this year and 2012's drama
"Mud," also
drew on very human feelings
within a larger
story.
JEFF NICHOLS: I don't care what
genre I'm
working in, if it's a sci-fi
film, which I
made last year, or if it's a
period piece
drama in this case.
I want to make films that
emotionally affect
the audience.
So, when I'm sitting back, and
I'm thinking
about things, I am struck by an
emotion that's
palpable.
In this film, it was Richard
Loving coming
home from the bar, sitting down
at the edge
of his wife's bed, and saying,
"I can take
care of you.
I can take care of you," when
everyone watching
that moment, his wife included,
knows that
he can't.
That struck me.
That made me feel something.
And if I get shivers, if I get
tingles, then
it's my job as a storyteller to
carry that
feeling all the way through the
writing, all
the way through the production
and the editing,
so that, when an audience sits
down, they
can feel it.
That's all I want to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: Since the
news of Gwen Ifill's death, we
have received
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: Since the
news of Gwen Ifill's death, we
have received
a flood of responses from those
remembering
her contributions to journalism
and to their
own lives.
We end with some of those, and
some of Gwen's
own thoughts on journalism.
GWEN IFILL: There's information
to be had,
facts to share, solutions to
discover, but
GWEN IFILL: There's information
to be had,
facts to share, solutions to
discover, but
you have to look up.
There is time we have, time we
lack, and the
ability to take advantage of
both.
The clock is on the wall, but
you have to
look up.
That means there are risks to be
taken.
WOMAN: I am Martha (ph) from
Oregon.
I am mourning the passing of
your colleague
and, I suspect, dear friend Gwen
Ifill.
I never had the privilege of
meeting Gwen
in person, but I still looked
forward to welcoming
her into my home via TV many
nights each week.
She was such a perceptive and
thoughtful journalist.
Her insights into the background
of an event,
what had already happened and
what might still
happen, and always delivered
with an optimistic
outlook, that was just what we
Americans needed.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Gwen was a friend of ours.
She was an extraordinary
journalist.
(APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: You can be the
person who turns
toward, not away, from the
chance to rise
above the fray.
And you can be the person who
trains yet another
generation to do better at it
than you did.
WOMAN: My name is Barbara (ph)
from Lakeville,
Connecticut.
My husband and I, both retired,
are regular
viewers of the "NewsHour."
I write this note with tears in
my eyes at
the passing of a beautiful woman
who contributed
so much to my understanding of
the world.
Our deepest sympathies to all
who knew her.
She will be greatly missed.
She will forever be a role model
for not just
journalists, but for all young
women.
GWEN IFILL: I tell this to young
people all
the time.
Rather than going around saying,
aha, they
didn't give this to me because I
was black
or I was a woman, you stop and
think, they
didn't give it to me because
they couldn't
imagine me in this role.
And it's my job then -- it's a
tougher job
than my white counterparts have,
but it's
just what it is.
My job is to force them to see
me in a different
role.
And then you act on that.
It's important to be reminded
how easily we
can be denied simple, obvious
opportunities,
how low the ceilings can get and
how much
fortitude it takes to refuse to
accept the
limits that others place on you.
But you now have the skills to
transcend those
limits.
Whose stories can you tell?
Whose voices are not being
heard?
Who gets to decide which stories
and voices
get ignored?
And what are you willing to do
about it?
MAN: This is Michael from
Texarkana, Texas.
I'm so saddened to hear of the
loss of Ms.
Ifill.
She has counseled me and
explained current
events to me for about 15 years.
I haven't been able to face much
of the news
and the analysis this past week,
but I thought,
when I was ready to get back in
it, she would
help me make sense of it all.
SEN.
HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: It really
was too bad that she died at age
61, a woman
who was really someone who broke
barriers.
Every step of her life was
something new and
something inspirational for
those around her.
I watch as often as I can the
"NewsHour,"
and I will miss her.
GWEN IFILL: We live in a world
of extremes,
often petty argument, where we
hide behind
our devices to insult one
another in a way
we would never do face to face.
Technology is fabulous, but this
is not what
it is for.
We have to harness our thinking
and our expressions
to add to the debates around us,
not to debase
them.
MAN: This is Perry (ph) from
California.
Her family and colleagues have
lost such a
talented and principled woman.
How sad that we lost her during
a time of
such upheaval, when her skills
are needed
more than ever.
GWEN IFILL: Cynics thinks that
they know all
the answers already, and then
they stop listening.
Skeptics always have more
questions to ask,
but we are willing to be
persuaded to the
honesty of an alternate point of
view, even
if we don't share it.
Is it possible to be skeptical
and optimistic
and ambitious, open, excited to
possibility
and willing to change the world
as well?
I think so.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We want to
give you a chance
to share your memories of Gwen.
You can call the number below,
703-594-6727,
and you can leave us a message
with your thoughts.
Online, you can read many of the
comments
we have already received.
Also online, we have gathered
some of Gwen's
words and interviews in our
final edition
of Gwen's Take.
All that and more is our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.